.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2016, Joyent, Inc.
.\" Copyright 2016, OmniTI Computer Consulting, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd April 02, 2021
.Dt BHYVE 5
.Os OmniOS
.Sh NAME
.Nm bhyve
.Nd zone brand for running a virtual machine instance under the bhyve hypervisor
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Nm
branded zone uses the
.Xr brands 5
framework to provide an environment for running a virtual machine under the
bhyve hypervisor.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
.Nm
zones are configured mostly via custom attributes in the zone configuration.
.Pp
Supported attributes are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Xo Sy acpi
.Sm off
.Ar on
|
.Ar off
.Xc
.Sm on
.Pp
Set to
.Ar on
to have
.Nm
generate ACPI tables for the guest
.Pq default: Ar off .
.It Sy bootdisk Ar path Ns Op , Ns Cm serial Ns = Ns Ar serial
.Pp
Specifies a ZFS volume dataset name which will be attached to
the guest as the boot disk.
Additional disks can be specified using the
.Sy disk
attribute, see below.
.Pp
If the optional serial number is not provided, one will be automatically
generated from the dataset name.
The ZFS volume must also be mapped into the zone using a
.Sy device
block as shown in the example below.
.Pp
A suitable ZFS volume can be created using the
.Ql zfs create -V
command, for example:
.Pp
.Dl zfs create -V 30G rpool/bootdisk2
.It Sy bootrom Ar firmware
.Pp
Specifies the name of the boot ROM to use for starting the virtual machine.
The available ROMs are:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Sy BHYVE_RELEASE_CSM Pq default
The default boot ROM that supports both UEFI and CSM (legacy) boot.
If the VM supports UEFI boot, you should use
.Sy BHYVE_RELEASE
instead, since it incorporates newer firmware.
.It Sy BHYVE_RELEASE
Production ROM supporting UEFI boot only.
.It Sy BHYVE
An alias for
.Sy BHYVE_RELEASE .
.It Sy BHYVE_CSM
An alias for
.Sy BHYVE_RELEASE_CSM .
.It Sy BHYVE_DEBUG_CSM
A version of the CSM ROM which produces debug messages to the console.
.It Sy BHYVE_DEBUG
A version of the UEFI ROM which produces debug messages to the console.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar firmware
parameter can also be specified as an absolute path to a custom ROM.
.It Sy cdrom Ns Oo Ar N Oc Ar path
.Pp
Specifies the path to one or more CD/DVD image
.Pq Pa .iso
files that will be inserted into virtual CD/DVD drive(s) in the guest.
To specify multiple image files, create multiple attributes with different
values of
.Ar N ,
starting with 0.
If only a single CD image is required,
.Ar N
can be omitted.
.Pp
Each image file must also be mapped into the zone using an
.Sy fs
block, as shown in the example below.
.It Sy console Ar options
.Pp
This parameter configures where the guest's console device is presented.
The default value is
.Pa /dev/zconsole
which means that the guest's console can be accessed via:
.Pp
.Dl zlogin -C <zone>
.Pp
Other supported values include
.Ar socket,<path>
which places a UNIX domain socket at
.Ql <path>
through which the console can be accessed.
.It Sy disk Ns Oo Ar N Oc Ar dataset Ns Op , Ns Cm serial Ns = Ns Ar serial
.Pp
Specifies one or more ZFS volume dataset names which will be attached to
the guest as disks.
To attach multiple disks, create multiple attributes with different values of
.Ar N .
In that case, the disk will be presented on target
.Ar N .
If only a single disk is required,
.Ar N
can be omitted.
The disks specified via the
.Sy disk
attribute are in addition to the system boot disk, which is specified using
.Sy bootdisk .
.Pp
If the optional serial number is not provided, one will be automatically
generated from the dataset name.
Each ZFS volume must also be mapped into the zone using a
.Sy device
block as shown in the example below.
.It Sy diskif Ar type
.Pp
Specifies the type of interface to which the disks will be attached.
Available options are:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy ahci
.It
.Sy nvme
.It
.Sy virtio-blk Pq default
.El
.It Sy hostbridge Ar type
.Pp
Specifies the type of emulated system host bridge that will be presented to
the guest.
Available options are:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy amd
.It
.Sy i440fx Pq default
.It
.Sy netapp
.It
.Sy q35
.It
.Sm off
.Sy vendor = Ar ID , Sy device = Ar ID
.Sm on
.El
.It Sy netif Ar type
.Pp
Specifies the type of network interface that will be used for the interfaces
presented to the guest.
Available options are:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy virtio-net-viona Pq accelerated virtio interface, default
.It
.Sy virtio-net Pq legacy virtio interface
.It
.Sy e1000
.El
.Pp
Note that only the accelerated virtio interface supports filtering using the
zone firewall.
.It Sy ram Ar size Ns Op Cm KMGT
.Pp
Specify the guest's physical memory size.
The
.Ar size
argument may be suffixed with one of
.Ar K ,
.Ar M ,
.Ar G
or
.Ar T
to indicate a multiple of kibibytes, mebibytes, gibibytes or tebibytes.
If no suffix is given, the value is assumed to be in mebibytes.
.Pp
The default value, if this attribute is not specified, is
.Sy 256M .
.It Xo Sy rng
.Sm off
.Ar on
|
.Ar off
.Xc
.Sm on
.Pp
Set to
.Ar on
to attach a virtio random number generator
.Pq RNG
to the guest
.Pq default: Ar off .
.It Sy priv.debug Ar on Ns | Ns Ar off
Set to
.Ar on
to enable debugging for privilege management.
The debug messages will appear in the zone's
.Pa /tmp/init.log .
.It Sy ppt Ns Ar N Ar on Ns | Ns Ar off
.Pp
Pass through a PCI device to the guest.
Available devices for pass-through can be viewed with
.Ql pptadm list -a .
.Ar N
must match the number of the desired device.
Set to
.Ar on
to enable pass-through, and to
.Ar off
to disable it.
.Pp
The
.Pa /dev/ppt Ns Ar N
device must also be passed through to the guest via a
.Sy device
block.
.Pp
To enable a PCI device for pass-through, it must be bound to the
.Sy ppt
driver and added to the
.Pa /etc/ppt_matches
file, after which it will be visible in the output of
.Ql pptadm list -a .
The binding can be achieved using
.Xr update_drv 1M
or by adding an entry to the
.Pa /etc/ppt_aliases
file
.Pq in the same format as Pa /etc/driver_aliases
and rebooting.
.It Sy type Ar type
.Pp
Specifies the type of the virtual machine.
This needs to be set for some guest operating systems so that things are
set up as they expect.
For most guests, this can be left unset.
Supported values are:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy generic Pq default
.It
.Sy openbsd
.It
.Sy windows
.El
.It Sy uuid Ar uuid
.Pp
Specifies the unique identifier for the virtual machine.
If this attribute is not set, a random UUID will be generated when the zone
is first installed.
.It Xo Sy vcpus
.Sm off
.Oo Cm cpus = Oc Ar numcpus
.Oo Cm ,sockets = Ar s Oc
.Oo Cm ,cores = Ar c Oc
.Oo Cm ,threads = Ar t Oc
.Xc
.Sm on
.Pp
Specify the number of guest virtual CPUs and/or the CPU topology.
The default value for each of the parameters is
.Sy 1 .
The topology must be consistent in that
.Ar numcpus
must equal the product of the other parameters.
.Pp
The maximum supported number of virtual CPUs is
.Sy 32 .
.It Sy vga Ar off Ns | Ns Ar on Ns | Ns Ar io
.Pp
Specify the type of VGA emulation to use when the framebuffer and VNC server
are enabled.
Possible values for this option are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy off Pq default
This option should be used for UEFI guests that assume that the VGA adapter is
present if they detect the I/O ports.
.It Sy on
This option should be used along with the CSM bootrom to boot traditional BIOS
guests that require the legacy VGA I/O and memory regions to be available.
.It Sy io
This option should be used for guests that attempt to issue BIOS calls which
result in I/O port queries and fail to boot if I/O decode is disabled.
.El
.It Xo Sy vnc
.Sm off
.Ar on
|
.Ar off
|
.Ar options
.Xc
.Sm on
.Pp
This parameter controls whether a virtual frambuffer is attached to the
guest and made available via VNC.
Available options are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy on
An alias for
.Sy unix=/tmp/vm.vnc
which creates the VNC socket within
.Pa /tmp
inside the zone.
.It Sy off
Disable the framebuffer.
This is the same as omitting the
.Sy vnc
attribute.
.It Sy unix Ns = Ns Ar path
Sets up a VNC server on a UNIX socket at the specified
.Ar path .
Note that this path is relative to the zone root.
.It Sy w
Specifies the horizontal screen resolution
.Pq default: 1024, max: 1920
.It Sy h
Specifies the vertical screen resolution
.Pq default: 768, max: 1200
.El
.Pp
Multiple options can be provided, separated by commas.
See also
.Sy xhci
below.
.Pp
The
.Nm
brand also ships a mini socat utility that can be used to connect the socket to
a TCP port.
The utility can be invoked like so:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/usr/lib/brand/bhyve/socat \e
        /zones/bhyve/root/tmp/vm.vnc 5905
.Ed
.Pp
If you prefer, you can also use the real socat utility that's shipped in core:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/usr/bin/socat \e
        TCP-LISTEN:5905,bind=127.0.0.1,reuseaddr,fork \e
        UNIX-CONNECT:/zones/bhyve/root/tmp/vm.vnc
.Ed
.It Sy extra Ar options
.Pp
Any extra
.Ar options
to be passed directly to the
.Nm
hypervisor.
.It Xo Sy xhci
.Sm off
.Ar on
|
.Ar off
.Xc
.Sm on
.Pp
Enable or disable the emulated USB tablet interface along with the emulated
framebuffer.
Note that this option currently needs to be disabled for
.Sy illumos
guests.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
An example
.Nm
zone is shown below:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t bhyve
set zonepath=/zones/bhyve
add net
    set allowed-address=10.0.0.112/24
    set physical=vm0
end
add device
    set match=/dev/zvol/rdsk/rpool/bhyve0
end
add attr
    set name=ram
    set type=string
    set value=2G
end
add attr
    set name=vcpus
    set type=string
    set value="sockets=2,cores=4,threads=2"
end
add attr
    set name=bootdisk
    set type=string
    set value=rpool/bhyve0
end
add fs
    set dir=/rpool/iso/debian-9.4.0-amd64-netinst.iso
    set special=/rpool/iso/debian-9.4.0-amd64-netinst.iso
    set type=lofs
    add options ro
    add options nodevices
end
add attr
    set name=cdrom
    set type=string
    set value=/rpool/iso/debian-9.4.0-amd64-netinst.iso
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdb 1 ,
.Xr proc 1 ,
.Xr dtrace 1m ,
.Xr zfs 1m ,
.Xr zoneadm 1m ,
.Xr zonecfg 1m ,
.Xr brands 5 ,
.Xr privileges 5 ,
.Xr resource_controls 5 ,
.Xr zones 5
