.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2016, Joyent, Inc.
.\" Copyright 2016, OmniTI Computer Consulting, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2019 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd March 25, 2019
.Dt ILLUMOS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm illumos
.Nd zone brand for running an independant illumos distribution
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An
.Em illumos
branded zone
uses the
.Xr brands 7
framework to provide an environment for running a generic illumos system.
.Pp
Subject to the constraints imposed by the shared kernel, it can be used to run
a foreign version of OmniOS userland or even a different illumos distribution.
.Pp
The zone must be installed using one of:  an absolute pathname of a
.Xr zfs 8
send stream of a dataset which contains an image of the software to be run in
the zone, a name of a
.Xr zfs 8
dataset to be cloned or snapshot to be promoted, or the absolute pathname of a
.Xr tar 1
file or gzipped tar file.
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zoneadm -z myzone install -x nodataset
zoneadm -z myzone install -s /path/to/sendstream.zfs
zoneadm -z myzone install -s name/of/dataset-to-clone
zoneadm -z myzone install -s name/of/snapshot-to@promote
zoneadm -z myzone install -t /path/to/tarball.tgz
.Ed
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Persistent network configuration (including DNS resolver information) can be
configured using
.Xr zonecfg 8 .
An example
.Em illumos
zone configured with VNIC "vnic0" using a static IP address is below:
.sp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t illumos
set zonepath=/zones/testzone
set autoboot=true
add net
    set physical=vnic0
    set allowed-address=192.168.0.2/24
    set defrouter=192.168.0.1
    set global-nic=auto
end
add attr
    set name=dns-domain
    set type=string
    set value=example.com
end
add attr
    set name=resolvers
    set type=string
    set value=192.168.12.1,192.168.13.1
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh LIMITATIONS
As there is only the single illumos kernel running on the system, not all
foreign distributions will run correctly.
If necessary, a full virtual machine can be used instead of
an
.Em illumos
branded zone.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdb 1 ,
.Xr proc 1 ,
.Xr brands 7 ,
.Xr privileges 7 ,
.Xr resource_controls 7 ,
.Xr zones 7 ,
.Xr dtrace 8 ,
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zoneadm 8 ,
.Xr zonecfg 8
