.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2019 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd March 25, 2019
.Dt IPKG 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipkg
.Nd zone brand for running a full copy of OmniOS
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em ipkg
brand
uses the
.Xr brands 7
framework to provide an environment for running a full copy of Omnios, with
independently managed software.
For routine patching, ipkg zones must be upgraded separately but core packages
such as the system libraries should be kept close to the version installed in
the global zone.
.Pp
If a package update in the global zone requires the creation of a new boot
environment (BE), then each ipkg zone will also get a new BE that will be
switched to when the global zone is restarted into its new BE.
.Pp
When performing major version upgrades, ipkg zones must be detached first and
then re-attached later; re-attach will trigger a full software update to bring
the zone back into sync with the global zone.
.Pp
.Em ipkg
zones are useful for some situations, but have generally been superseded by
.Xr lipkg 7
zones which automatically keep core system packages synchronised with the
global zone.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Persistent network configuration (including DNS resolver information) can be
configured using
.Xr zonecfg 8 .
An example
.Em ipkg
zone configured with VNIC "vnic0" using a static IP address is below:
.sp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t ipkg
set zonepath=/zones/testzone
set autoboot=true
add net
    set physical=vnic0
    set allowed-address=192.168.0.2/24
    set defrouter=192.168.0.1
    set global-nic=auto
end
add attr
    set name=dns-domain
    set type=string
    set value=example.com
end
add attr
    set name=resolvers
    set type=string
    set value=192.168.12.1,192.168.13.1
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh LIMITATIONS
.Em ipkg
zone boot environments are linked to the global zone boot environment under
which they were created.
This means that rolling back the global zone to a previous boot environment
will also roll back the zone.
For this reason, zone data which should be shared across boot environments
should be allocated to a dedicated dataset.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr brands 7 ,
.Xr lipkg 7 ,
.Xr privileges 7 ,
.Xr resource_controls 7 ,
.Xr zones 7 ,
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zoneadm 8 ,
.Xr zonecfg 8
