.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2016, Joyent, Inc.
.\" Copyright 2016, OmniTI Computer Consulting, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2020 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd April 4, 2020
.Dt LX 5
.Os OmniOS
.Sh NAME
.Nm lx
.Nd zone brand for running a GNU/Linux user-level environment
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em lx
brand
uses the
.Xr brands 5
framework to provide an environment for running binary applications built
for GNU/Linux.
User-level code, including an entire Linux distribution, can run inside the
zone.
Both 32-bit and 64-bit applications are supported.
The majority of Linux system calls are provided, along with emulation for a
variety of Linux file systems, such as
.Em proc ,
.Em cgroup
and
.Em sysfs .
.Pp
The
.Em /proc
file system within the zone is a subset of a full Linux
.Em /proc .
Most kernel-level tuning applied to
.Em /proc
is unavailable or ignored.
Some tuning can be performed, but only to reduce the overall limits that have
been specified on the zone's configuration.
That is, within the zone there is no way to increase the resource limits set
on the zone itself.
.Pp
The zone must be installed using one of:  an absolute pathname of a
.Xr zfs 1m
send stream of a dataset which contains an image of the software to be run in
the zone, a name of a
.Xr zfs 1m
dataset to be cloned or snapshot to be promoted, or the absolute pathname of a
.Xr tar 1
file or gzipped tar file.
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
zoneadm -z myzone install -x nodataset
zoneadm -z myzone install -s /path/to/sendstream.zfs
zoneadm -z myzone install -s name/of/dataset-to-clone
zoneadm -z myzone install -s name/of/snapshot-to@promote
zoneadm -z myzone install -t /path/to/tarball.tgz
.Ed
.Pp
Applications provided by the base OmniOS operating system are also available
within the zone under the
.Em /native
mount point.
This allows the use of various native tools such as
.Xr dtrace 1m ,
.Xr mdb 1 ,
or the
.Xr proc 1
tools on GNU/Linux applications.
However, not every native tool will work properly within an
.Em lx
zone.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
In addition to the standard configuration options provided by the
.Xr zones 5
framework, the following additional attributes are available for
.Em lx
zones.
These are defined as string attributes at the top level of the zone
configuration (see the example below).
.Bl -tag -width 15
.It Cm dns-domain
The DNS domain name for the zone, used to configure name resolution within the
linux environment.
.It Cm ipv6
Enable IPV6 within the zone,
.Ar true
or
.Ar false
(defaults to
.Ar true ) .
.It Cm kernel-version
Specify the Linux version that the zone is emulating.
This is a string value that is used in various places, including the output of
the
.Nm uname
command and the contents of
.Pa /proc/version .
.It Cm resolvers
A comma-delimited list of DNS resolver IP addresses, used to configure name
resolution within the linux environment.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
An example
.Em lx
zone configured with VNIC "lx1" using a static IP address is below:
.sp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t lx
set zonepath=/zones/lx1
set autoboot=true
add net
    set physical=lx1
    set allowed-address=192.168.0.2/24
    set defrouter=192.168.0.1
    set global-nic=auto
end
add attr
    set name=dns-domain
    set type=string
    set value=example.com
end
add attr
    set name=resolvers
    set type=string
    set value=192.168.12.1,192.168.13.1
end
add attr
    set name=kernel-version
    set type=string
    set value=4.3.0
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh LIMITATIONS
The brand only supports the exclusive IP stack zone configuration.
.Pp
Most modern GNU/Linux application software runs on
.Em lx ,
but because there are some system calls or file systems which are not currently
implemented, it's possible that an application won't run.
This does not preclude the application running in the future as the
.Em lx
brand adds new capabilities.
.Pp
As there is only the single illumos kernel running on the system, there
is no support for any Linux kernel-level modules.
That is, there is no support for add-on drivers or any other modules that are
part of the Linux kernel itself.
If that is required, a full virtual machine should be used instead of
an
.Em lx
branded zone.
.Pp
Any core files produced within the zone are in the native illumos format.
.Pp
As with any zone, the normal security mechanisms and privileges apply.
Thus, certain operations (for example, changing the system time), will not be
allowed unless the zone has been configured with the appropriate additional
privileges.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdb 1 ,
.Xr proc 1 ,
.Xr dtrace 1m ,
.Xr zfs 1m ,
.Xr zoneadm 1m ,
.Xr zonecfg 1m ,
.Xr brands 5 ,
.Xr privileges 5 ,
.Xr resource_controls 5 ,
.Xr zones 5
