.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKG.DEPOTD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg.depotd
.Nd Image Packaging System depot server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /usr/lib/pkg.depotd
.Op Fl \&-cfg Ar source
.Op Fl a Ar address
.Op Fl \&-content-root Ar root_dir
.Op Fl d Ar inst_root
.Op Fl \&-debug Ar feature_list
.Sm off
.Oo Fl \&-disable-ops
.No \&=
.Ar op Op /1
.Op \&,...
.Oc
.Sm on
.Op Fl \&-image-root Ar path
.Op Fl \&-log-access Ar dest
.Op Fl \&-log-errors Ar dest
.Op Fl \&-mirror Ar mode
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Fl \&-proxy-base Ar url
.Op Fl \&-readonly Ar mode
.Op Fl s Ar threads
.Op Fl \&-sort-file-max-size Ar bytes
.Op Fl \&-ssl-cert-file Ar source
.Op Fl \&-ssl-dialog Ar type
.Op Fl \&-ssl-key-file Ar source
.Op Fl t Ar socket_timeout
.Op Fl \&-writable-root Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the depot server for the Image Packaging System,
.Xr pkg 7 .
It provides network access to the data contained within a package repository.
Clients that do not support direct access to a repository through the file
system, or for which network access is the only available or preferred method
of transport, typically use the package depot.
.Pp
Clients such as
.Xr pkg 1 ,
the retrieval client, can retrieve a list of packages and package metadata from
a repository directly or through the depot server.
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
the publication client, can send new versions of packages to a repository
directly or through the depot server.
.Xr pkgrepo 1
can be used to create repositories for use with the depot server, or to manage
them both directly and through the depot server.
.Pp
.Nm
is typically run as a service on the system.
Package and software developers might want to run private copies for testing.
.Pp
The depot does not provide any access control methods of its own.
By default, all of the clients that are able to connect are able to read all
package data and publish new package versions.
The exception is that when running under Service Management Facility
.Pq SMF ,
the default is to run in read-only mode.
The
.Sx Notes
section below describes some best practices for maintaining a public depot
server with evolving content.
.Sh SMF PROPERTIES
The
.Nm
server is generally configured via the SMF properties associated with its
service.
The
.Sy svc:/application/pkg/server
service runs a
.Nm
server process.
.Pp
See the
.Xr smf 7
man page for information about SMF properties.
The following properties are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy pkg/address
.Pq Sy net_address
The IP address on which to listen for connections.
The default value is 0.0.0.0
.Pq Sy INADDR_ANY ,
which listens on all active interfaces.
To listen on all active IPv6 interfaces, use
.Sq :: .
Only the first value is used.
.It Sy pkg/content_root
.Pq Sy astring
The file system path at which the instance should find its static and other web
content.
The default value is
.Pa /usr/share/lib/pkg .
.It Sy pkg/debug
.Pq Sy astring
A comma-separated list of debug features to enable.
Possible values are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy headers
Logs the headers of every request to the error log.
.El
.It Sy pkg/disable_ops
.Pq Sy astring
A comma-separated list of operations that should be disabled for the depot
server.
Operations are given as
.Ar operation Ns Op / Ar version
.Po
.Sy catalog
or
.Sy search_1 ,
for example
.Pc .
.It Sy pkg/image_root
.Pq Sy astring
The path to the image whose file information will be used as a cache for file
data.
.It Sy pkg/inst_root
.Pq Sy astring
The file system path at which the instance should find its repository data.
Required unless
.Ev PKG_REPO
has been provided.
The default value is
.Pa /var/pkgrepo .
.It Sy pkg/log_access
.Pq Sy astring
The destination for any access related information logged by the depot process.
Possible values are:
.Dv stderr ,
.Dv stdout ,
none ,or an absolute path name.
The default value is
.Dv stdout
if
.Dv stdout
is a
.Sy tty .
If
.Dv stdout
is not a
.Sy tty ,
the default value is
.Sq none .
If you run
.Sy pkg
as a service, the default value for
.Sy log_access
is
.Sq none
and output is written to
.Pa /var/svc/log/application-pkg-server:* .
See the
.Xr logadm 8
man page for examples of managing large log files.
.It Sy pkg/log_errors
.Pq Sy astring
The destination for any errors or other information logged by the depot process.
Possible values are:
.Dv stderr ,
.Dv stdout ,
none ,or an absolute path name.
The default value is
.Dv stderr .
See the
.Xr logadm 8
man page for examples of managing large log files.
.It Sy pkg/mirror
.Pq Sy boolean
Sets whether package mirror mode is used.
When true, publishing and metadata operations are disabled and only a limited
browser user interface is provided.
This property cannot be true when the
.Sy pkg/readonly
property is true.
The default value is
.Sy false .
.It Sy pkg/port
.Pq Sy count
The port number on which the instance should listen for incoming package
requests.
If SSL certificate and key information has not been provided, the default value
is 80; otherwise, the default value is 443.
.It Sy pkg/proxy_base
.Pq Sy uri
This changes the base URL for the depot server and is most useful when running
behind Apache or some other web server in a reverse proxy configuration.
.It Sy pkg/readonly
.Pq Sy boolean
Sets whether modifying operations, such as those initiated by
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
are disabled.
Retrieval operations are still available.
This property cannot be true when the
.Sy pkg/mirror
property is true.
The default value is
.Sy true .
.It Sy pkg/socket_timeout
.Pq Sy count
The maximum number of seconds the server should wait for a response from a
client before closing a connection.
The default value is 60.
.It Sy pkg/sort_file_max_size
.Pq Sy count
The maximum size of the indexer sort file.
Used to limit the amount of RAM the depot uses for indexing, or increase it for
speed.
.It Sy pkg/ssl_cert_file
.Pq Sy astring
The absolute path name to a PEM-encoded Certificate file.
The default value is
.Sq none .
This property must be used with
.Sy ssl_key_file .
The depot only responds to SSL requests if both
.Sy ssl_cert_file
and
.Sy ssl_key_file
are provided.
.It Sy pkg/ssl_dialog
.Pq Sy astring
Specifies what method should be used to obtain the passphrase used to decrypt
the
.Sy ssl_key_file .
Possible values are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy builtin
Prompt for the passphrase.
This is the default value.
.It Sy exec\&: Ns Pa /path/to/program
Execute the specified external program to obtain the passphrase.
The first argument to the program is '', and is reserved.
The second argument to the program is the port number of the server.
The passphrase is printed to
.Dv stdout .
.It Sy smf:fmri
Attempt to retrieve the value of the property
.Sy pkg_secure/ssl_key_passphrase
from the service instance related to the FMRI.
.El
.It Sy pkg/ssl_key_file
.Pq Sy astring
The absolute path name to a PEM-encoded Private Key file.
This property must be used with the property
.Sy ssl_cert_file .
The depot only responds to SSL requests if both
.Sy ssl_key_file
and
.Sy ssl_cert_file
are provided.
.It Sy pkg/threads
.Pq Sy count
The number of threads started to serve requests.
The default value is 60.
Suitable only for small deployments.
This value should be approximately 20 times the number of concurrent clients.
The maximum value of
.Sy threads
is 5000.
.It Sy pkg/writable_root
.Pq Sy astring
The file system path to a directory to which the program has write access.
This is used with the
.Fl readonly
option to enable the depot server to create files, such as search indexes,
without needing write access to the package information.
.It Sy pkg_secure/ssl_key_passphrase
.Pq Sy astring
The password to use to decrypt the
.Sy pkg/ssl_key_file .
This value is read-authorization protected using the attribute
.Sy solaris.smf.read.pkg-server .
.El
.Pp
The presentation and behaviour of the Browser User Interface
.Pq BUI
of the depot server is controlled using the following properties:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy pkg_bui/feed_description
.Pq Sy astring
A descriptive paragraph for the RSS/Atom feed.
.It Sy pkg_bui/feed_icon
.Pq Sy astring
The path name of a small image used to visually represent the RSS/Atom feed.
The path name should be relative to the
.Sy content_root .
The default value is
.Sy web/_themes/pkg-block-icon.png .
.It Sy pkg_bui/feed_logo
.Pq Sy astring
The path name of a large image that will be used to visually brand or identify
the RSS/Atom feed.
This value should be relative to the
.Sy content_root .
The default value is
.Sy web/_themes/pkg-block-icon.png .
.It Sy pkg_bui/feed_name
.Pq Sy astring
A short, descriptive name for RSS/Atom feeds generated by the depot serving the
repository.
The default value is
.Dq package repository feed .
.It Sy pkg_bui/feed_window
.Pq Sy count
The number of hours before the feed for the repository was last generated, to
include when generating the feed.
.El
.Pp
The package depot is also able to act as a mirror server for local client
images from
.Xr pkg 7 .
This enables clients that share a subnet on a LAN to mirror their file caches.
Clients can download files from one another, thereby reducing load on the
package depot server.
This functionality is available as an alternate depot service configured by SMF.
It uses mDNS and
.Sy dns-sd
for service discovery.
.Pp
The mDNS mirror is generally configured via the SMF properties associated with
its service.
The following properties are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy pkg/image_root
.Pq Sy astring
The path to the image whose file information will be used as a cache for file
data.
The default value is
.Sq / .
.It Sy pkg/port
.Pq Sy count
The port number on which the instance should listen for incoming package
requests.
The default value is 80.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Nm
can read its base configuration information from a file or from the property
data of an existing SMF service instance.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \&-cfg Ar source
Specify the path name of a file to use when reading and writing configuration
data, or a string of the form
.Sy smf\&: Ns Ar fmri
where
.Ar fmri
is the service fault management resource identifier
.Pq FMRI
of the instance to read configuration data from.
See
.Sx Depot Configuration
below for details on the format of the file specified.
.El
.Pp
If no preexisting configuration source is available, or to override values read
from a configuration file provided using
.Fl \&-cfg ,
the following options can be used to alter the default behaviour of the depot
server:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a Ar address
See
.Sy pkg/address
above.
.It Fl \&-content-root Ar root_dir
See
.Sy pkg/content_root
above.
.It Fl d Ar inst_root
See
.Sy pkg/inst_root
above.
.It Fl \&-debug Ar feature_list
See
.Sy pkg/debug
above.
.It Xo
.Sm off
.Oo Fl \&-disable-ops
.No \&=
.Ar op Op /1
.Op \&,...
.Oc
.Sm on
.Xc
See
.Sy pkg/disable_ops
above.
.It Fl \&-image-root Ar path
See
.Sy pkg/image_root
above.
.It Fl \&-log-access Ar dest
See
.Sy pkg/log_access
above.
.It Fl \&-log-errors Ar dest
See
.Sy pkg/log_errors
above.
.It Fl \&-mirror Ar mode
See
.Sy pkg/mirror
above.
.It Fl p Ar port
See
.Sy pkg/port
above.
.It Fl \&-proxy-base Ar url
See
.Sy pkg/proxy_base
above.
This option is ignored if an empty value is provided.
.It Fl \&-readonly Ar mode
See
.Sy pkg/readonly
above.
.It Fl s Ar threads
See
.Sy pkg/threads
above.
.It Fl \&-sort-file-max-size Ar bytes
See
.Sy pkg/sort_file_max_size
above.
.It Fl \&-ssl-cert-file Ar source
See
.Sy pkg/ssl_cert_file
above.
.It Fl \&-ssl-dialog .Ar type
See
.Sy pkg/ssl_dialog
above.
.It Fl \&-ssl-key-file Ar source
See
.Sy pkg/ssl_key_file
above.
.It Fl t Ar socket_timeout
See
.Sy pkg/socket_timeout
above.
.It Fl \&-writable-root Ar path
See
.Sy pkg/writable_root
above.
.It Fl \&-help , \&?
Display a usage message.
.El
.Pp
Additional administrative and management functionality for package repositories
is provided by
.Xr pkgrepo 1 .
.Sh DEPOT CONFIGURATION
When a configuration file is provided
.Pq instead of an SMF FMRI
by using the
.Fl \&-cfg
option, the depot server reads and writes all configuration data in a simple
text format.
The configuration data is described in
.Sx SMF Properties
above.
The configuration data consists of sections, lead by a
.Bq section
header, and followed by
.Ar name Ns \&= Ns Ar value
entries.
Continuations are in the style of RFC 822.
Values can be split over multiple lines by beginning continuation lines with
whitespace.
.Pp
Any required values not provided in the configuration file must be provided
using the option listed in
.Sx Options
above.
A sample configuration file might look like this:
.Bd -literal -offset 6n
[pkg]
port = 80
inst_root = /export/repo

[pub_example_com]
feed_description = example.com's software
  update log
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /usr/share/lib/pkg
Default presentation content location.
Modify
.Sy pkg/content_root
to select an alternate location.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Successful operation.
.It 1
An error occurred.
.It 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1 No Enabling the Depot Server
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
svcadm enable application/pkg/server
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 2 No Changing the Listening Port of the Server
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
svccfg -s application/pkg/server setprop pkg/port = 10000
svcadm refresh application/pkg/server
svcadm restart application/pkg/server
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 3 No Enabling the Mirror
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
svcadm enable application/pkg/dynamic-mirror
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev PKG_REPO
Specifies the directory that contains the repository to serve.
This value is ignored if
.Fl d
is specified.
.It Ev PKG_DEPOT_CONTENT
Specifies the directory that contains static content served by the depot.
The files listed below under
.Sx Files
should be present in this directory, although their content can differ from the
supplied default content.
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kill 1 ,
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr pkgrepo 1 ,
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
.Xr smf 7 ,
.Xr dns-sd 8 ,
.Xr mdnsd 8 ,
.Xr svcadm 8 ,
.Xr syslogd 8
.Sh NOTES
The
.Nm
service is managed by SMF under the service identifier
.Sy svc:/application/pkg/server .
.Pp
The mDNS mirror service is managed by SMF under the service identifier
.Sy svc:/application/pkg/dynamic-mirror .
.Pp
To control read access to the depot, you can use an HTTP reverse proxy in
combination with authentication methods such as client based SSL certificate
access, which
.Xr pkg 1
natively supports.
.Pp
Changes to configuration, or changes to package data using file system based
operations, require a restart of the depot server process so that the changes
can be reflected in operations and output.
Use one of the following methods to restart the depot server process:
.Bl -bullet -offset Ds
.It
Use
.Xr svcadm 8
to restart the
.Sy application/pkg/server
instance.
.It
Send a
.Dv SIGUSR1
signal to the depot server process using
.Xr kill 1 .
This executes a graceful restart that leaves the process intact but reloads
all configuration, package, and search data:
.Pp
.Dl kill -USR1 <pid>
.El
