'\" te
.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2021 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd July 29, 2021
.Dt PKGDIFF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgdiff
.Nd compare package manifests
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Oo Fl i Ar attribute Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl o Ar attribute Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl t Ar action_name Ns Oo \&, Ns Ar action_name Oc Ns \&... Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl v Ar name Ns \&= Ns Ar value Oc Ns \&...
.Ar file1 file2
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
compares two package manifests and reports differences.
One of the manifests can be read from
.Dv stdin
by specifying
.Sy -
in place of the file name.
.Nm
sorts each manifest and action into a consistent order before comparison.
.Pp
Output is in the following form:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy \&+ Ar complete_action
This action is in
.Ar file2
but not in
.Ar file1 .
.It Sy \&- Ar complete_action
This action is in
.Ar file1
but not in
.Ar file2 .
.It Sy \&- Ar attribute1 Ns = Ns Ar value1
This
.Ar attribute Ns \&, Ns Ar value
is in
.Ar file1
but not in
.Ar file2 .
.It Sy \&+ Ar attribute2 Ns = Ns Ar value2
This
.Ar attribute Ns \&, Ns Ar value
is in
.Ar file2
but not in
.Ar file1 .
.El
.Pp
Actions with different variants but the same type and key attribute value are
treated as separate actions for purposes of comparison.
Thus, actions that change attributes are shown in their complete form rather
than as attribute changes.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \&-help
Display a usage message.
.It Fl i Ar attribute
Ignore
.Ar attribute
if present during comparisons.
Ignoring the
.Cm hash
attribute will also ignore any other hash attribute and, similarly, ignoring
.Cm size
will ignore all sizes.
Ignoring any attribute with this option will automatically also ignore the
.Cm timestamp
attribute.
This option cannot be used with the
.Fl o
option.
This option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl o Ar attribute
Only report differences in
.Ar attribute .
This option cannot be used with the
.Fl i
option.
This option elides any action changes that do not affect
.Ar attribute
on an action.
This option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl t Ar action_name Ns Oo \&, Ns Ar action_name Oc Ns \&...
Only compare the specified actions.
Multiple actions can be specified in a comma-separated list.
The value of
.Ar action_name
is one of the actions listed in "Actions" in the
.Xr pkg 5
man page.
For example, the following values could be specified for
.Ar action_name :
.Cm file ,
.Cm dir ,
.Cm driver ,
.Cm depend ,
.Cm set .
This option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl v Ar name Ns = Ns Ar value
Only compute differences for this variant value.
For example, only compute differences for
.Cm arch=sparc .
This variant tag is removed for all actions before comparison.
Only one value can be specified per variant.
This option can be specified multiple times for different variants.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy 0
No differences were found.
.It Sy 1
Differences were found.
.It Sy 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It Sy 3
An error occurred.
.It Sy 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg 5
.Pp
.Lk https://github.com/omniosorg/pkg5
