'\" te
.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2020 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.TH pkgfmt 1 "24 Apr 2020" "OmniOS" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pkgfmt \- format a package manifest
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
/usr/bin/pkgfmt [-c|-d|-s|-u] [-f \fIv1|v2\fR] [\fIpackage-manifest-file\fR]
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
.sp
.LP
\fBpkgfmt\fR without the \fB-c\fR or \fB-d\fR options formats a package
manifest in a consistent manner, including wrapping lines at 80 characters,
sorting lines by attributes. There are two different output formats - \fBv1\fR
and \fBv2\fR - which have different sorting characteristics and are described
below.
The default output format is \fBv2\fR.
Lines that do not parse into actions (such as macros, comments, or transforms)
do not appear in sorted order.
.sp
.LP
If no arguments are given, \fBpkgfmt\fR reads \fBstdin\fR until EOF, and then
writes the formatted manifest to \fBstdout\fR. Any manifests specified on the
command line are formatted in place.
.sp
.LP
\fBpkgfmt\fR with the \fB-c\fR option checks whether the manifests are
formatted in \fBpkgfmt\fR style. The \fB-d\fR option displays the differences
if the file is not properly formatted.
.sp
.LP
\fBpkgfmt\fR with the \fB-s\fR option removes additional diagnostic attributes
from actions that are not required in a published manifest.

.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
\fBpkgfmt\fR supports two different output formats selectable with the \fB-f\fR
option. The default format is \fBv2\fR.

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fBv1\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
The \fBv1\fR format places \fIset\fR actions first, \fIdepend\fR actions last
and all other actions in between, sorted alphabetically. Actions are
secondarily sorted by their primary attribute.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fBv2\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
The \fBv2\fR format groups actions together into different sections. The
resulting action order is:
.sp
.RS 4n
1. \fIset\fR actions
.br
2. all other actions, sorted by key attribute
.br
3. \fIdriver\fR, \fIgroup\fR and \fIuser\fR actions
.br
4. \fIlegacy\fR and \fIlicense\fR actions
.br
5. \fIdepend\fR actions.
.RE
.sp
In particular, this format groups \fIfile\fR, \fIdir\fR, \fIlink\fR and
\fIhardlink\fR actions together by path which can aid readability.

.SH OPTIONS
.sp
.LP
The following options are supported:
.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-h\fR | \fB--help\fR | \fB-?\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Display a usage message.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-c\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Check whether the manifest is formatted in the \fBpkgfmt\fR style.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-d\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Display manifest differences from the formatted version in unified form.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-f\fR \fIv1|v2\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Specify the desired output format.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-s\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Remove unecessary diagnostic attributes from manifest actions.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB-u\fR
.ad
.RS 10n
.rt
Do not wrap lines at 80 characters. This option is useful for applying traditional text processing tools to package manifests.
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.sp
.LP
The following exit values are returned:
.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB0\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
.rt
Command succeeded.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB1\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
.rt
The \fB-c\fR or \fB-d\fR options were specified, and one or more manifests are not in \fBpkgfmt\fR normal form, or an error occurred.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB2\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
.rt
Invalid command line options were specified.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.mk
.na
\fB99\fR
.ad
.RS 6n
.rt
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.RE

.SH ATTRIBUTES
.sp
.LP
See \fBattributes\fR(5) for descriptions of the following attributes:
.sp

.sp
.TS
tab() box;
cw(2.75i) |cw(2.75i)
lw(2.75i) |lw(2.75i)
.
ATTRIBUTE TYPEATTRIBUTE VALUE
_
Availability\fBpackage/pkg\fR
_
Interface StabilityUncommitted
.TE

.SH SEE ALSO
.sp
.LP
\fBpkg\fR(5)
.sp
.LP
\fBhttps://github.com/omniosorg/pkg5\fR
