.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2019, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKGLINT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkglint
.Nd Image Packaging System package lint
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c Ar cache_dir
.Oo Fl r Ar repo_uri Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl p Ar regexp
.Op Fl e Ar extension_path
.Op Fl f Ar config_file
.Op Fl b Ar build_no
.Op Fl v
.Oo Fl l Ar lint_uri Oc Ns \&...
.Ar manifest Ns \&...
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl L
.Op Fl v
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs a series of checks on one or more package manifests, optionally
referencing another repository.
.Pp
.Nm
should be used during the package authoring process, prior to package
publication.
.Nm
performs exhaustive testing on the manifests that might be too expensive to
perform during normal operation of
.Xr pkgsend 1
or
.Xr pkg.depotd 8 .
.Nm
checks include tests for duplicate actions, missing attributes, and unusual
file permissions.
.Pp
Manifests for linting can be passed as a space-separated list of local files on
the command line, or manifests can be retrieved from a repository.
.Pp
When retrieving manifests from repositories, on first run
.Nm
creates and populates
.Xr pkg 7
user images in the specified cache directory.
If the
.Fl r
option is supplied, a user image named
.Ar cache_dir Ns Sy /ref_image
is created for the reference repository.
If the
.Fl l
option is supplied, a user image named
.Ar cache_dir Ns Sy /lint_image
is created for the lint repository.
No content is installed in these images.
These images are only used by
.Nm
to retrieve manifests from the repositories.
.Pp
Subsequent invocations of
.Nm
can reuse the cache directory and can omit any
.Fl r
or
.Fl l
arguments.
.Pp
.Nm
provides limited support for configuring publishers in the cache directory.
Use
.Xr pkg 1
to perform more complex publisher configuration on these images.
.Pp
.Nm
allows package authors to bypass checks for a given manifest or action.
A manifest or action that contains the attribute
.Sy pkg.linted
set to
.Sy True
does not produce any lint output for that manifest or action.
.Pp
More granular
.Sy pkg.linted
settings can be made using substrings of
.Nm
check names.
For example,
.Sy pkg.linted\&. Ns Em check Ns \&. Ns Em id
set to
.Sy True
bypasses all checks with the name
.Ar check Ns \&. Ns id
for the given manifest or action.
.Pp
The behaviour of
.Nm
can be configured by specifying a
.Sy pkglintrc
file.
By default,
.Nm
searches in
.Pa /usr/share/lib/pkg/pkglintrc
and
.Pa $HOME/.pkglintrc
for configuration options.
Use the
.Fl f
option to specify a different configuration file.
.Pp
During the lint run, any errors or warnings encountered are printed to
.Dv stderr .
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , \&-help
Display a usage message.
.It Fl b Ar build_no
Specify a build number used to narrow the list of packages used during linting
from lint and reference repositories.
If no
.Fl b
option is specified, the latest versions of packages are used.
See also the
.Sy version.pattern
configuration property.
.It Fl c Ar cache_dir
Specify a local directory used for caching package metadata from the lint and
reference repositories.
.It Fl l Ar lint_uri
Specify a URI representing the location of the lint repository.
Both HTTP and file system based publication are supported.
If you specify
.Fl l ,
then you must also specify
.Fl c .
The
.Fl l
option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl L
List the known and excluded lint checks and then exit.
Display the short name and description of each check.
When combined with the
.Fl v
flag, display the method that implements the check instead of the description.
.It Fl e Ar extension_path
Directory to add to the Python search path when loading
.Nm
extensions.
.It Fl f Ar config_file
Configure the
.Nm
session using the
.Ar config_file
configuration file.
.It Fl p Ar regexp
Specify a regular expression used to narrow the list of packages to be checked
from the lint repository.
All manifests from the reference repository are loaded
.Po
assuming they match the value for
.Fl b ,
if supplied
.Pc ,
ignoring this pattern.
.It Fl r Ar repo_uri
Specify a URI representing the location of the reference repository.
If you specify
.Fl r ,
then you must also specify
.Fl c .
The
.Fl r
option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl v
Run
.Nm
in a verbose mode, overriding any
.Sy log_level
settings in the configuration file.
.El
.Sh FILES
The
.Sy pkglintrc
configuration file takes the following key/value arguments:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy log_level
The minimum level at which to emit lint messages.
Lint messages lower than this level are discarded.
The default value is
.Sy INFO .
.Pp
Log levels in order of least to most severe are
.Sy DEBUG ,
.Sy INFO ,
.Sy WARNING ,
.Sy ERROR ,
and
.Sy CRITICAL .
.It Sy do_pub_checks
If
.Sy True ,
perform checks that might only make sense for published packages.
The default value is
.Sy True .
.It Sy pkglint.ext.*
The plugin mechanism of
.Nm
allows for additional lint modules to be added at runtime.
Any key that starts with
.Sy pkglint.ext\&.
takes a value that must be a fully-specified Python module.
See the
.Sx Developers
section for more information.
The
.Ar extension_path
option specifies additional directory locations to search when loading
extensions.
.It Sy extension_path
A list of directories, separated by
.Sq \&: ,
to search for extension modules.
If the
.Fl e
flag is specified on the command line, it is added higher in the search order
than this configuration file option.
.It Sy pkglint.exclude
A space-separated list of fully specified Python modules, classes, or function
names to omit from the set of checks performed.
.It Sy use_progress_tracker
If
.Sy True ,
use a progress tracker when iterating over manifests during lint runs.
The default value is
.Sy True .
.It Sy version.pattern
A version pattern, used when specifying a build number to lint against
.Pq Fl b .
If not specified in the configuration file, the
.Fl b
option uses the pattern
.Sy *,5.11-0\&. ,
matching all components of the 5.11 build, with a branch prefix of 0.
.El
.Sh DEVELOPERS
To extend the set of checks performed by
.Nm ,
subclass
.Sy pkg.lint.base.Checker
and its subclasses,
.Sy ManifestChecker
and
.Sy ActionChecker .
Add the Python module name that contains those classes to a new
.Sy pkglint.ext\&.
key in the configuration file.
.Pp
Instances of those new subclasses are created by
.Nm
on startup.
Methods inside each subclass with the special keyword argument
.Sy pkglint_id
are invoked during the course of the lint session.
Those methods should have the same signature as the corresponding
.Sy check()
method in the super class.
Methods should also be assigned a
.Sy pkglint_desc
attribute, which is used as the description printed by
.Sy pkglint -L .
.Pp
Parameters are available to
.Sy Checker
subclasses, allowing them to tune their behaviour.
The recommended parameter naming convention is
.Em pkglint_id Ns \&. Ar name .
Parameter values can be stored in the configuration file, or accessed in
manifests or actions retrieved using the
.Sy LintEngine.get_param()
method.
When accessing parameters from the manifest, the prefix
.Sy pkg.lint
is prepended to the key name to ensure that
.Nm
parameters do not overlap with any existing action or manifest values.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Command succeeded.
.It 1
One or more package manifests contain lint errors.
.It 2
An error occurred that is not a lint error in a manifest.
For example, an invalid command line option might have been specified.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1 No First Run on a Particular Repository
.Pp
Running a
.Nm
session for the first time on a given repository.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkglint -c /space/cache -r http://localhost:10000 mymanifest.mf
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 2 No Subsequent Run on the Same Repository
.Pp
A subsequent run against the same repository used in Example 1.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkglint -c /space/cache mymanifest-fixed.mf
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 3 No Using a Lint Repository With a Narrowed Manifest Set
.Pp
Running a
.Nm
session with a lint repository and specifying a subset of manifests to check.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkglint -c /space/othercache -l http://localhost:10000 \e
    -p '.*firefox.*'
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 4 No Specifying a Build
.Pp
Running a
.Nm
session against a given build in verbose mode.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkglint -c /space/cache -r http://localhost:10000 \e
    -l http://localhost:12000 -b 147 -v
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 5 No Modifying a Configuration File
.Pp
A configuration file with a new lint module, excluding some checks.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
cat ~/.pkglintrc
  [pkglint]
  log_level = DEBUG
  # log_level = INFO
  pkglint.ext.mycheck = org.timf.mychecks
  pkglint.ext.opensolaris = pkg.lint.opensolaris
  pkglint.exclude: pkg.lint.opensolaris.OpenSolarisActionChecker
  pkg.lint.pkglint.PkgActionChecker.unusual_perms
  pkg.lint.pkglint.PkgManifestChecker
  pkg.lint.opensolaris.OpenSolarisManifestChecker
.Ed
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
.Xr pkg 7 ,
.Xr pkg.depotd 8
