.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2015, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKGRECV 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgrecv
.Nd Image Packaging System content retrieval utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl aknrv
.Op Fl s Ar src_path Ns | Ns Ar src_uri
.Op Fl d Ar dest_path Ns | Ns Ar dest_uri
.Op Fl c Ar cache_dir
.Op Fl m Ar match
.Op Fl \&-mog-file Ar file_path No \&...
.Op Fl \&-raw
.Op Fl \&-key Ar src_key Fl \&-cert Ar src_cert
.Op Fl \&-dkey dest_key Fl \&-dcert Ar dest_cert
.Ar fmri | pattern No \&...
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl s Ar src_path Ns | Ns Ar src_uri
.Fl \&-newest
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl nv
.Op Fl s Ar src_path Ns | Ns Ar src_uri
.Op Fl d Ar dest_path Ns | Ns Ar dest_uri
.Op Fl \&-key Ar src_key Fl \&-cert Ar src_cert
.Fl \&-clone
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
retrieves all versions of each matching
.Ar fmri
or
.Ar pattern
from the
.Xr pkg 7
repository or package archive specified by the
.Fl s
option and optionally republishes the retrieved packages to the package
repository or package archive specified by the
.Fl d
option.
By default, packages are retrieved in package repository format suitable for
use with
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr pkg.depotd 8 ,
and package publication tools.
.Pp
Packages that have not changed are not republished.
Therefore, the time to update an existing repository depends on the number of
new and changed packages.
.Pp
Use the
.Fl m
option to specify whether to retrieve all versions of each matching package, or
only the newest version of each matching package.
.Pp
If you do not specify
.Sq \&*
to be retrieved, you might want to specify the
.Fl r
option to be sure to retrieve all the dependencies of the specified packages.
.Pp
Note -
.Bd -ragged -offset Ds
Do not use multiple instances of
.Nm
simultaneously to republish packages to the same destination repository or
archive.
In this case, newly received packages could contain duplicate actions.
.Ed
.Pp
After a
.Nm
operation that retrieves packages into a
.Ar dest_uri ,
if the
.Ar dest_uri
repository must support
.Sy pkg search
operations, run
.Sy pkgrepo refresh
on that repository to update search indexes.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Display a usage message.
.It Fl a
Store the retrieved package data in a
.Xr pkg 7
archive at the location specified by the
.Fl d
option.
The file specified by
.Fl d
cannot already exist.
The
.Fl a
option can be used only with file system based destinations.
Although not required, using a file extension of
.Sq .p5p
.Po for example,
.Pa archive.p5p
.Pc
is strongly suggested.
The
.Fl a
option cannot be combined with the
.Fl \&-raw
option.
.It Fl c Ar cache_dir
Specify the path to a directory that will be used to cache downloaded content.
If this directory is not supplied, the client automatically selects a cache
directory.
In the case where a download is interrupted, and a cache directory was
automatically chosen, use this option to resume the download.
See the
.Sx Environment Variables
section below for details about how to set the location used for temporary data
storage.
.It Fl d Ar dest_path Ns \&| Ns Ar dest_uri
Specify the file system path or URI where the retrieved packages should be
republished.
If
.Fl a
is specified, this destination must be a package archive that does not already
exist.
If
.Fl a
is not specified, this destination must be a package repository that already
exists.
Use the
.Xr pkgrepo 1
command to create a new package repository.
If
.Fl d
is not specified, the value of
.Ev PKG_DEST
is used.
See
.Sx Environment Variables
below.
.It Fl k
Keep the retrieved package content compressed.
This option is ignored when republishing.
Compressed package content should not be used with
.Sy pkgsend .
.It Fl m Ar match
Control which versions of packages are retrieved if
.Ar pattern
is specified or if
.Ar fmri
is not fully specified.
For this description, the following four example packages exist in the source
specified by the
.Fl s
option.
In these FMRI, the characters between the
.Sy @
and the
.Sy \&:
denote the numbered package version, and the characters from the
.Sy \&:
to the end denote the timestamp portion of the version string.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.1:20120904T180335Z
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.1:20120903T170234Z
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.0:20120820T165108Z
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.0:20120819T155007Z
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy all-timestamps
Retrieve all versions of each matching
.Ar fmri
or
.Ar pattern
.Pq implies Sy all-versions .
This is the default behaviour if the
.Fl m
option is not specified.
In the example above, all four packages are retrieved.
.It Sy all-versions
Retrieve the latest timestamp for each version of each matching
.Ar fmri
or
.Ar pattern .
In the example above, the following two packages are retrieved:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.1:20120904T180335Z
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.0:20120820T165108Z
.Ed
.It Sy latest
Retrieve only the newest version of each matching
.Ar fmri
or
.Ar pattern .
In the example above, only the following package is retrieved:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
pkg://omnios/package/pkg@0.5.11-151038.1:20120904T180335Z
.Ed
.El
.It Fl \&-mog-file Ar file_path
Specifies a file containing
.Xr pkgmogrify 1
transforms to be applied to the manifest of each package before it is copied to
the destination package repository.
.Sq \&-
can be specified to use stdin as input.
If both files
and
.Sq \&-
are specified together,
.Sq \&-
will be ignored and only files specified are used.
Use of this option will automatically cause any existing package signatures to
be dropped from the package.
Adding new hashable actions such as files and licenses is not allowed.
This option can be specified multiple times.
This option may not be combined with
.Fl \&--clone .
.It Fl n
Perform a trial run with no changes made.
.It Fl p Ar publisher
Only clone the specified publisher.
This option can be specified multiple times.
The
.Fl p
option is valid only with the
.Fl \&-clone
option.
.It Fl r
Recursively retrieve all dependencies for each matching
.Ar fmri
or
.Ar pattern .
.It Fl s Ar src_path Ns \&| Ns Ar src_uri
Specify the file system path or URI of a
.Xr pkg 7
repository or package archive from which to receive package data.
If
.Fl s
is not specified, the value of
.Ev PKG_SRC
is used.
See
.Sx Environment Variables
below.
.It Fl v
Display verbose output, including the number of packages retrieved and their
full FMRIs, the number of files retrieved, and the estimated size of the
transfer.
.It Fl \&-key Ar src_key
Specify a client SSL key file to use for package retrieval from the source
HTTPS repository.
.It Fl \&-cert Ar src_cert
Specify a client SSL certificate file to use for package retrieval from the
source HTTPS repository.
.It Fl \&-dkey Ar dest_key
Specify a client SSL key file to use for package publication to the destination
HTTPS repository.
.It Fl \&-dcert Ar dest_cert
Specify a client SSL certificate file to use for package publication to the
destination HTTPS repository.
.It Fl \&-clone
Make an exact copy of the source repository.
By default, the clone operation succeeds only if publishers in the source
repository are also present in the destination.
To limit the clone operation to specified publishers, use the
.Fl p
option.
Publishers specified by using the
.Fl p
option are added to the destination repository if they are not already present.
Packages that are in the destination repository but not in the source
repository are removed.
The clone operation leaves the destination repository altered if an error
occurs.
Therefore, the destination repository should be in its own ZFS dataset, and a
snapshot should be created prior to performing the clone operation.
.It Fl \&-newest
List the most recent versions of the packages available from the repository
specified by the
.Fl s
option.
All other options are ignored.
.It Fl \&-raw
Retrieve and store the raw package data in a set of directory structures by
stem and version at the location specified by
.Fl d .
The
.Fl \&-raw
option can be used only with file system based destinations.
This package data can be used to conveniently modify and republish packages,
perhaps by correcting file contents or providing additional package metadata.
The
.Fl \&-raw
option cannot be combined with
.Fl a .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Command succeeded.
.It 1
An error occurred.
.It 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It 3
Multiple operations were requested, but only some of them succeeded.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1 No List Newest Packages
.Pp
List the newest packages available from the repository on the system named
.Sy test .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://test --newest
pkg://omnios/system/library/c++-runtime@0.5.11,151038.0:20120921T190358Z
pkg://omnios/system/library/freetype-2@2.4.8,151038.0:20120109T215840Z
pkg://omnios/system/library/math@0.5.11,151038.0:20120921T190432Z
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 2 No Retrieve Raw Package Data
.Pp
Receive the
.Sy c++-runtime
package from Example 1 in a format suitable for use with
.Sy pkgsend publish .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://test \e
    -d /local/repo --raw \e
    c++-runtime@0.5.11,151038.0:20120921T190358Z
    Processing packages for publisher omnios ...
    Retrieving and evaluating 1 package(s)
    PROCESS       ITEMS     GET (MB)    SEND (MB)
    Completed       1/1      3.5/3.5      0.0/0.0
ls /local/repo
    pkg5.repository  publisher  system%2Flibrary%2Fc%2B%2B-runtime
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 3 No Retrieve Dependencies From a System
.Pp
Receive the package
.Sy editor/vim
and all of its dependencies from the system named
.Sy test .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://test -d /local/repo -r editor/vim
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 4 No Retrieve Only the Latest Version
.Pp
Receive only the latest version of the package
.Sy editor/vim
from the system named
.Sy test .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://test -d /local/repo -m latest -v \e
    editor/vim
Processing packages for publisher omnios ...
Retrieving and evaluating 1 package(s)
Retrieving packages ...
Packages to add:       1
Files to retrieve:    1557
Estimated transfer size: 9.21 MB
Packages to transfer:
editor/vim@7.3.600,151038.0:20120904T172128Z
    PROCESS       ITEMS     GET (MB)    SEND (MB)
    Completed       1/1      9.2/9.2    25.4/25.4
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 5 No Retrieve All Versions and Republish Remotely
.Pp
Receive all versions of the package
.Sy library/zlib
from the system named
.Sy test
and republish it to a remote repository on the system named
.Sy remote .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://test -d http://remote:10000 \e
    -m all-versions library/zlib
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 6 No Retrieve Dependencies From a Repository
.Pp
Receive the package
.Sy editor/gnu-emacs
and all of its dependencies from the repository located at
.Pa /export/repo .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s /export/repo -d /local/repo -r editor/gnu-emacs
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 7 No Retrieve Additional Packages and Changed Content
.Pp
Receive all packages that do not already exist and all changed content from the
repository located at
.Lk https://pkg.omnios.org/bloody/core/
to the repository located at
.Pa /export/bloody .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s https://pkg.omnios.org/bloody/core/ \e
    -d /export/bloody -m all-timestamps '*'
.Ed
.Pp
Receive all packages that do not already exist and all changed content from the
secure repository located at
.Lk https://pkg.omnios.org/bloody/core/
to the repository located at
.Pa /export/bloody .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s https://pkg.omnios.org/bloody/core/ \e
    -d /export/bloody -m all-timestamps \e
    --key /var/pkg/ssl/Your-Organisation.key.pem \e
    --cert /var/pkg/ssl/Your-Organisation.certificate.pem '*'
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 8 No Create a Package Archive
.Pp
Create a package archive containing the package
.Sy editor/gnu-emacs
and all of its dependencies from the repository located at
.Lk http://example.com:10000 .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s http://example.com:10000 -d /my/emacs.p5p -a \e
    -r editor/gnu-emacs
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 9 No Copy Packages From an Archive to a Repository
.Pp
Copy all of the packages in a package archive to an existing repository located
at
.Pa /export/repo .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgrecv -s /my/archive.p5p -d /export/repo '*'
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 10 No Change publisher name
.Pp
Change the publisher name of the package
.Sq foo
and all its dependencies into
.Sq extra
during republishing.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
echo '<transform set name=pkg.fmri -> edit value
    (pkg://).*?(/.*) \e1extra\e2' | \e
    pkgrecv -s repo1 -d repo2 --mog-file - foo
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev PKG_DEST
The path of a directory to save the retrieved package to, or the file system
path or URI of a repository or package archive where the packages will be
copied.
.It Ev PKG_SRC
A URI or file system path representing the location of a
.Xr pkg 7
repository or package archive from which to retrieve packages.
.It Ev TMPDIR
The absolute path of the directory where temporary data should be stored during
program execution.
If not set, the default is to store temporary data in
.Pa /var/tmp .
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr pkgrepo 1 ,
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
.Xr pkg 7 ,
.Xr pkg.depotd 8
