.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2019 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd March 25, 2019
.Dt PKGSRC 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgsrc
.Nd zone brand for running a reduced copy of OmniOS alongside Joyent's pkgsrc
repository
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em pkgsrc
brand
uses the
.Xr brands 7
framework to provide an environment for running a small copy of Omnios, with
system software packages linked to those installed in the global zone.
.Pp
A
.Em pkgsrc
zone is a
.Xr sparse 7
zone which is pre-configured to use Joyent's binary package repository.
This provides access to over 20,000 ready-built packages ready to install and
use.
Within a pkgsrc zone, use the pkgin command to manage these packages which
are all installed under the
.Pa /opt/local
directory.
Like
.Xr ipkg 7
zones,
.Em pkgsrc
zones can have multiple boot environments, created either locally within the
zone or managed automatically from the global zone as BEs are
created/destroyed there.
.Pp
Given their small size, low overhead and ease of maintenance, it is common to
use pkgsrc zones for running individual services such as an NTP, DHCP or DNS
server.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Persistent network configuration (including DNS resolver information) can be
configured using
.Xr zonecfg 8 .
An example
.Em lipkg
zone configured with VNIC "vnic0" using a static IP address is below:
.sp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t pkgsrc
set zonepath=/zones/testzone
set autoboot=true
add net
    set physical=vnic0
    set allowed-address=192.168.0.2/24
    set defrouter=192.168.0.1
    set global-nic=auto
end
add attr
    set name=dns-domain
    set type=string
    set value=example.com
end
add attr
    set name=resolvers
    set type=string
    set value=192.168.12.1,192.168.13.1
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh LIMITATIONS
Within a
.Em pkgsrc
zone, the
.Pa /usr ,
.Pa /lib
and
.Pa /sbin
directories are read-only.
.Pp
.Em pkgsrc
zone boot environments are linked to the global zone boot environment under
which they were created.
This means that rolling back the global zone to a previous boot environment
will also roll back the zone.
For this reason, zone data which should be shared across boot environments
should be allocated to a dedicated dataset.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr brands 7 ,
.Xr ipkg 7 ,
.Xr privileges 7 ,
.Xr resource_controls 7 ,
.Xr zones 7 ,
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zoneadm 8 ,
.Xr zonecfg 8
