.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKGSEND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgsend
.Nd Image Packaging System publication client
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Ar command
.Op Ar cmd_options
.Op Ar operands
.Pp
.Nm
.Ic generate
.Op Fl T Ar pattern
.Op Fl \&-target Ar file
.Ar source Ns \&...
.Pp
.Nm
.Ic publish
.Oo Fl b Ar bundle Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl d Ar source Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl s Ar repo_uri_or_path
.Oo Fl \&-key Ar ssl_key Fl \&-cert Ar ssl_cert Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl T Ar pattern
.Op Fl \&-no-catalog
.Oo Ar manifest Ns Oc \&...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
enables the publication of new packages and new package versions to an image
packaging repository using package manifests.
To create or manage repositories, see
.Xr pkgrepo 1 .
To create package archives from packages in an existing repository, see
.Xr pkgrecv 1 .
For more information about package manifests, see
.Xr pkg 7 .
.Pp
After a
.Nm Ic publish
operation, if your
.Ar repo_uri_or_path
repository must support
.Sy pkg search
operations, run
.Sy pkgrepo refresh
on the repository to update search indexes.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \&-help , Fl \&?
Display a usage message.
.El
.Sh SUB-COMMANDS
The following subcommands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Xo
.Nm
.Ic generate
.Op Fl T Ar pattern
.Op Fl \&-target Ar file
.Ar source
.Xc
.Pp
Read each
.Ar source
.Po
such as an SVR4 package, a directory, or a
.Xr tar 1
file
.Pc
and emit the manifest that describes the
.Ar source
to
.Dv stdout .
In the output manifest,
.Ic file
and
.Ic dir
actions have owner set to
.Sy root
and group set to
.Sy bin .
.Pp
The output manifest can then be annotated, have dependencies added or analyzed
using
.Xr pkgdepend 1 ,
and have its correctness verified using
.Xr pkglint 1
before being passed to the
.Ic publish
subcommand.
.Bl -bullet -offset Ds
.It
Filesystem format SVR4 packages
.It
Datastream format SVR4 packages
.It
.Xr tar 1
files
.It
Directories
.El
.Pp
If the base name of files in the source match the patterns specified with
.Fl T ,
the timestamp of the file is added to the action for that file.
The
.Ar pattern
uses shell matching rules:
.Bl -tag -width 8n -offset Ds
.It Sy \&*
Matches everything.
.It Sy \&?
Matches any single character.
.It Cm \&[ Ns Ar seq Cm \&]
Matches any character in
.Ar seq .
.It Cm \&![ Ns Ar seq Cm \&]
Matches any character not in
.Ar seq .
.El
.Pp
When the specified source is a directory, there is no clear way to distinguish a
.Ic file
action from a
.Ic hardlink
action when there are multiple path names for a single inode.
Normally, the first one found in the file system walk is treated as a file and
the rest as hardlinks.
This can be arbitrary, depending on the implementation of the file system.
To specify which path names should be treated as files, pass each path name as
an argument to the
.Fl \&-target
option.
This option has no effect on other types of sources because they are capable of
expressing which path names are files and which are hardlinks.
.Pp
When SVR4 packages are provided as a source,
.Nm
checks that no files with class action scripts are present and no preinstall,
postinstall, preremove, or postremove scripts are present.
An exception is made for any SMF manifests installed with the
.Sy manifest
class.
.Sy BASEDIR
is removed from all relocatable paths.
.Pp
The SVR4
.Sy DESC
parameter is converted to a
.Sy pkg.description
value.
The SVR4
.Sy NAME
parameter is converted to a
.Sy pkg.summary
value.
.It Xo
.Nm
.Ic publish
.Oo Fl b Ar bundle Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl d Ar source Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl s Ar repo_uri_or_path
.Oo Fl \&-key Ar ssl_key Fl \&-cert Ar ssl_cert Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl T Ar pattern
.Op Fl \&-no-catalog
.Oo Ar manifest Ns Oc \&...
.Xc
.Pp
Publish a package using the specified package manifests to the target package
repository, retrieving files for the package from the provided sources.
If multiple manifests are specified, they are joined in the order provided.
If a manifest is not specified, the manifest is read from
.Dv stdin .
.Pp
If not specified,
.Nm Ic publish
adds the build version to the package FMRI.
The
.Ic publish
tool also adds the timestamp
.Pq the current time in UTC
to the package FMRI.
See the
.Xr pkg 7
man page for information about the version string of a package FMRI.
.Pp
If multiple
.Nm Ic publish
processes might be publishing to the same
.Fl s
repository simultaneously, specifying the
.Fl \&-no-catalog
option is recommended.
See the description of the
.Fl \&-no-catalog
option below.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b Ar bundle
Add the specified bundle to the list of sources to search when looking for
files in the manifest.
Bundles are sources such as tar files and SVR4 packages.
If this option is specified multiple times, sources are searched in the order
they appear on the command line.
If both
.Fl b
and
.Fl d
are specified,
.Fl d
sources are searched first.
For a description of supported bundles and how they are used, refer to the
.Ic generate
subcommand above.
.It Fl d Ar source
Add the specified directory to the list of sources to search when looking for
files in the manifest.
If this option is specified multiple times, sources are searched in the order
they appear on the command line.
For a description of supported sources and how they are used, refer to the
.Ic generate
subcommand above.
.It Fl s Ar repo_uri_or_path
Publish the package to the repository located at the given URI or file system
path.
See the
.Sx Notes
section below for more information about restrictions and suggestions for
publication.
See also the
.Sx Environment Variables
section.
.It Fl \&-key Ar ssl_key Fl \&-cert Ar ssl_cert
Use the
.Fl \&-key
option to specify a client SSL key file to use for package retrieval from an
HTTPS repository.
Use the
.Fl \&-cert
option to specify a client SSL certificate file to use for package retrieval
from an HTTPS repository.
This option pair can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl \&-no-catalog
Do not add the package to the publisher's catalog.
This option is recommended whenever multiple packages are being published at
one time because updates to publisher catalogs must be performed serially.
Publication performance might be significantly reduced if this option is not
used when multiple processes are simultaneously publishing packages.
After publication is complete, the new packages can be added to the respective
publisher catalogs by using the
.Sy pkgrepo refresh
command.
For a description of the
.Fl T
option, see the
.Ic generate
subcommand above.
.El
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variable is supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev PKG_REPO
The path or URI of the destination repository.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Command succeeded.
.It 1
An error occurred.
.It 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1 No Generate and Publish a Package
.Pp
Create a package using
.Nm Ic generate
and publish it.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsend generate /path/to/proto > /path/to/manifests/foo.p5m
.Ed
.Pp
Add the package FMRI for the
.Sy example.com
publisher to the beginning of
.Pa foo.p5m .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@1.0
.Ed
.Pp
The resulting manifest should look like this:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@1.0
dir group=sys mode=0755 owner=root path=usr
dir group=bin mode=0755 owner=root path=usr/bin
file usr/bin/foo group=bin mode=0555 owner=root path=usr/bin/foo
.Ed
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsend publish -s http://example.com:10000 -d /path/to/proto \e
    /path/to/manifests/foo.p5m
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 2 No Create and Publish a Trivial Package
.Pp
Create a manifest for publisher
.Sy example.com
containing the following lines:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@1.0-1
file /exdir/foo mode=0555 owner=root group=bin path=/usr/bin/foo
.Ed
.Pp
Publish the package:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsend publish -s http://example.com:10000 -d /exdir
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 3 No Use a Preexisting Manifest
.Pp
Publish a package using file system based publication and a preexisting
manifest.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsend publish -s /tmp/example_repo -d /tmp/pkg_files \e
    /tmp/pkg_manifest
.Ed
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkgdepend 1 ,
.Xr pkgrepo 1 ,
.Xr tar 1 ,
.Xr pkg 7 ,
.Xr pkg.depotd 8
.Sh NOTES
Because of publication protocol limitations, file system based publication must
be used when publishing individual package files that are greater than 128 MiB
in size.
File system based publication is also recommended when access control for a
repository is needed.
.Pp
When using file system based publication, any
.Sy pkg.depotd
processes that are serving the target repository must be restarted after
publication is completed for the changes to be reflected in its web interface
or search responses.
See
.Xr pkg.depotd 8 .
