.\" Copyright (c) 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKGSURF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgsurf
.Nd Image Packaging System repository resurfacing utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl s Ar target_repo
.Fl r Ar refrence_repo
.Op Fl n
.Oo Fl p Ar publisher_prefix Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl i Ar name Oc Ns \&...
.Oo Fl c Ar pattern Oc Ns \&...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a package publication tool for replacing packages in a target repository
that have not changed since the latest published version in the reference
repository.
The result is a new version surface of all packages in the target repository.
.Pp
.Nm
operations are not reversible.
In case the
.Nm
operation must be reverted, you should store the target repository in its own
ZFS dataset and take a snapshot of the dataset before you run
.Nm .
.Pp
Packages in the target repository are compared to packages in the reference
repository and analyzed for content changes.
For each package, if no content change is found, the package manifest is
removed from the target repository and replaced with the manifest of the same
package from the reference repository.
.Pp
The target repository must be a file system based repository.
For optimal performance, the reference repository should also be a file system
based repository.
.Pp
The target repository should contain only one version of each package.
If the target repository contains a package that is both newer than the latest
version in the reference repository and older than the latest version in the
target repository, no package manifest replacement is done for that package.
.Pp
The reference repository can contain one or more versions of each package.
However, only the latest version will be used for comparison.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \&help , Fl \&?
Display a usage message.
.It Fl c Ar pattern
Treat every package whose FMRI matches
.Ar pattern
as changed and do not reversion it, even if there is no content change.
This option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl i Ar name
Ignore
.Ic set
actions with the
.Ic name
field set to
.Ar name
for determination of content change.
The package will be reversioned even if this action differs between target and
reference versions.
This option can be specified multiple times.
.It Fl n
Perform a trial run of the operation with no changes made to the target
repository.
.It Fl p Ar publisher_prefix
Specify the name of the publisher to be resurfaced.
This option can be specified multiple times.
.Pp
By default, packages from all publishers found in target and reference
repositories are resurfaced.
.It Fl r Ar reference_repo
Specify the URI of the reference repository to be used for manifest comparison.
Only the latest version of each package is considered.
.It Fl s Ar target_repo
Specify the path to the target repository.
Packages in this repository are reversioned to the versions present in the
reference repository according to the comparison results.
The target repository should contain only one version of each package.
The target repository must be a file system based repository.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variable is supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev PKG_REPO
The absolute path of the target repository.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Command succeeded.
.It 1
An error occurred.
.It 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1
Resurface a Repository
.Pp
Reversion each package in the target repository that did not have any content
change from the same package in the reference repository.
.Pp
.D1 Nm Fl s Pa /path/to/target Fl r Lk http://reference.example.com
.Pp
Sample package in the target repository:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@2.0:20381001T163427Z
dir group=sys mode=0755 owner=root path=usr
.Ed
.Pp
Sample package in the reference repository:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@1.0:20381001T163427Z
dir group=sys mode=0755 owner=root path=usr
.Ed
.Pp
Sample package in the target repository after the
.Nm
operation:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
set name=pkg.fmri value=pkg://example.com/foo@1.0:20381001T163427Z
dir group=sys mode=0755 owner=root path=usr
.Ed
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkgrepo 1 ,
.Xr pkg 7
