.\" Copyright (c) 2007, 2013, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright 2022 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.Dd February 17, 2022
.Dt PKGSIGN 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgsign
.Nd Image Packaging System signing utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl a Ar hash_algorithm
.Op Fl c Ar path_to_signing_certificate
.Oo Fl i Ar path_to_intermediate_cert Oc Ns \&...
.Op Fl k Ar path_to_private_key
.Op Fl n
.Fl s Ar path_or_uri
.Op Fl \&-help
.Op Fl \&-no-index
.Op Fl \&-no-catalog
.Op Fl \&-dkey Ar ssl_key Fl \&-cert Ar ssl_cert
.br
.Ar pkg_fmri_pattern Ns \&...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
updates the manifest for the given FMRIs in place in the repository by adding a
signature action using the provided key and certificates.
The modified package retains the original timestamp.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \&-help
Display a usage message.
.It Fl a Ar hash_algorithm
Use the signature algorithm
.Ar hash_algorithm
instead of the default.
The default signature algorithm is
.Sy rsa-sha256 .
Supported signature algorithms are
.Sy rsa-sha256 ,
.Sy rsa-sha384 ,
.Sy rsa-sha512 ,
.Sy sha256 ,
.Sy sha384 ,
and
.Sy sha512 .
A signature algorithm that only specifies a hash algorithm causes the signature
value to be the hash of the manifest of the package.
A signature algorithm that specifies
.Sy rsa
and a hash algorithm causes the signature value to be the hash of the manifest
signed with the private key provided
.Po
see the
.Fl c
and
.Fl k
options
.Pc .
.It Fl c Ar path_to_signing_certificate
Add the certificate
.Ar path_to_signing_certificate
as the certificate to use when verifying the value of the signature in the
action.
The
.Fl c
option can only be used with the
.Fl k
option.
.It Fl i Ar path_to_intermediate_cert
Add the certificate
.Ar path_to_intermediate_cert
as a certificate to use when validating the certificate
.Ar path_to_signing_certificate
given as an argument to
.Fl c .
Multiple certificates can be provided by specifying
.Fl i
multiple times.
.It Fl k Ar path_to_private_key
Use the private key stored in
.Ar path_to_private_key
to sign the manifest.
The
.Fl k
option can only be used with the
.Fl c
option.
If
.Fl k
is not set, then the signature value is the hash of the manifest.
.It Fl n
Perform a trial run that does not change the repository in any way.
.It Fl s Ar path_or_uri
Sign packages in the repository at
.Ar path_or_uri .
.It Fl \&-no-index
Do not update the repository search indexes after the signed manifest has been
republished.
.It Fl \&-no-catalog
Do not update the repository catalog after the signed manifest has been
republished.
.It Fl \&-dkey Ar ssl_key
Specify a client SSL key file to use for communication with a remote HTTPS
repository.
.It Fl \&-dcert Ar ssl_cert
Specify a client SSL certificate file to use for communication with a remote
HTTPS repository.
.El
.Sh OPERANDS
The following operand is supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ar pkg_fmri_pattern
Specifies packages to sign.
The
.Ar pkg_fmri_pattern
operand can include the
.Sq \&?
and
.Sq \&*
characters as
.Xr glob 3C Ns -style
wildcards to match one or more packages.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Command succeeded.
.It 1
An error occurred.
.It 2
Invalid command line options were specified.
.It 3
Multiple operations were requested, but only some of them succeeded.
.It 99
An unanticipated exception occurred.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Sy Example 1 No Sign Using the Hash Value of the Manifest
.Pp
Sign a package published to
.Lk http://localhost:10000
using the hash value of the manifest.
This is often useful for testing.
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsign -s http://localhost:10000 -a sha256 \e
    example_pkg@1.0,5.11-0:20100626T030108Z
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Example 2 No Sign Using a Key and Certificate
.Pp
Sign a package published into the file repository in
.Pa /foo/bar
using
.Sy rsa-sha384
to hash and sign the manifest.
The signature key is in
.Pa /key/usr2.key ,
its associated certificate is in
.Pa /key/usr2.cert ,
and a certificate needed to validate the certificate is in
.Pa /icerts/usr1.cert .
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
pkgsign -s file:///foo/bar/ -a rsa-sha384 \e
    -k /key/usr2.key -c /key/usr2.cert -i /icerts/usr1.cert \e
    example_pkg@1.0,5.11-0:20100626T031341Z
.Ed
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
The command line interface of
.Nm
is
.Sy Uncommitted .
The output of
.Nm
is
.Sy Not-An-Interface
and may change at any time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg 1 ,
.Xr pkgrecv 1 ,
.Xr pkgrepo 1 ,
.Xr pkgsend 1 ,
.Xr glob 3C ,
.Xr pkg 7
