.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2019 OmniOS Community Edition (OmniOSce) Association.
.\"
.Dd March 25, 2019
.Dt SPARSE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sparse
.Nd zone brand for running a reduced copy of OmniOS with linked packages
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em sparse
brand
uses the
.Xr brands 5
framework to provide an environment for running a small copy of Omnios, with
system software packages linked to those installed in the global zone.
.Pp
A
.Em sparse
zone is an
.Xr lipkg 5
zone where several of its filesystems are directly shared with the global zone.
This makes a sparse zone very small indeed (and quick to build) but they are
only suitable for software packages that do not need to install files under
shared filesystems such as
.Pa /usr ;
those being read-only within the zone.
Like
.Xr ipkg 5
zones,
.Em sparse
zones can have multiple boot environments, created either locally within the
zone or managed automatically from the global zone as BEs are
created/destroyed there.
.Pp
Given their small size, low overhead and ease of maintenance, it is common to
use sparse zones for running individual services such as an NTP, DHCP or DNS
server.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Persistent network configuration (including DNS resolver information) can be
configured using
.Xr zonecfg 1m .
An example
.Em lipkg
zone configured with VNIC "vnic0" using a static IP address is below:
.sp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
create -t sparse
set zonepath=/zones/testzone
set autoboot=true
add net
    set physical=vnic0
    set allowed-address=192.168.0.2/24
    set defrouter=192.168.0.1
    set global-nic=auto
end
add attr
    set name=dns-domain
    set type=string
    set value=example.com
end
add attr
    set name=resolvers
    set type=string
    set value=192.168.12.1,192.168.13.1
end
.Ed
.sp
.Sh LIMITATIONS
Within a
.Em sparse
zone, the
.Pa /usr ,
.Pa /lib
and
.Pa /sbin
directories are read-only.
.Pp
.Em sparse
zone boot environments are linked to the global zone boot environment under
which they were created.
This means that rolling back the global zone to a previous boot environment
will also roll back the zone.
For this reason, zone data which should be shared across boot environments
should be allocated to a dedicated dataset.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr zfs 1m ,
.Xr zoneadm 1m ,
.Xr zonecfg 1m ,
.Xr brands 5 ,
.Xr ipkg 5 ,
.Xr privileges 5 ,
.Xr resource_controls 5 ,
.Xr zones 5
